---
title: Formals and swaps
subtitle: Dining options for grads
layout: default
categories: services
modal-id: 3
date: 2014-07-16
img: superhall_400_289.png
thumbnail: superhall_400_289.png
alt: image-alt

---

## Caff dinners

The ‘caff’ (cafeteria) is where you can get a cheap and nutritious meal day to day. If you are missing those traditional Sunday Roasts come along to the Carvery, available every Sunday during Term. The caff provides three meals a day – Breakfast from 8.00 to 9.00am (not at the weekend), Lunch from 12.15 to 1.45 pm (12.00 to 1.30 pm at the weekend) and Dinner from 5.45 to 6.45 pm.
The grads usually turn out in numbers on a Saturday, when the college puts on a great brunch from 11am to 1.30pm
If you’re after informal fare, the bar also does pizza.

## Formal hall (main hall)

Dinner starts every night, except Monday and Saturday, at 7.30pm, and is three courses.
 The dress code is gowns for Jesuans, and smart for guests.

## Grad hall

A four course dinner is served at 7.30pm each Wednesday in the Upper Hall.
 Before dinner, pre-drinks are served in the grad room from 7.00pm.
 The dress is smart casual, and gowns are not worn.

## High table

A four to five course dinner is served at 7.30pm in Hall on Tuesday’s during term.
 Wine from the college cellars is included in the price. Pre-drinks are served in
 the combination room from 7.00pm. To get there, go through the big wooden doors
 beside the old stone carved section of the cloisters (looking through the carved
   section you can see the downstairs room of where you are going). The drinks
   themselves are served up the big wooden staircase. Dress is smart with gowns

## Superhalls

Several times a year the graduate community comes together for a super hall. These
 events are themed feasts, followed by a bop. Dates for the superhalls are on the
 MCR calendar.

**For more info meals in college, <a href="http://mcr.jesus.cam.ac.uk/mcrwiki/index.php?title=Main_Page" target="_blank">check out the wiki (Raven login required)</a>**
